
The Kenyan economy was, once again, in the toilet. The money had been stolen, misused, more had been borrowed, also stolen and misused and now we were broke and in debt. This, dire as it was, was not particularly shocking; it was business as usual. The shocking part was when the government announced that we had stumbled into a new and quite lucrative source of funding.  This announcement deeply unsettled nearly every Kenyan who heard it at some level. You see, a healthy dose of pessimism is an integral part of the Kenyan diet. It's how we avoid inevitable disappointment. By expecting and preparing for it. When the government announces that they have come into a great deal of money this is sufficient cause for a lot of worrying. There are questions that every Kenyan asks.

The first of these questions is how this money was acquired and just how illegal it was. Should the money, against all odds, turn out to be legal then the next question is obvious. How long was it going to take before it disappeared or was mismanaged? If, impossible as the concept may seem, it somehow survived the bottomless well of corruption that is government, then one more question needed to be asked. If the money was both legal and surviving then what exactly was that money buying? Or, more to the point, what exactly had Kenyans been sold into?

The first question was easy enough. A collective of private research institutes wanted  to set base in the country. They were willing to fund our projects if we agreed to let them build their institutions here. Their motives were fairly transparent.  Cheap labour, lower taxes, loser regulations. It was a good investment opportunity and a solid win for them. Funding our projects was well worth the potential profits and good will it would buy. 

The second question was pretty clear as well. The institutes didn't plan to fund projects indefinitely and the government needed them happy. This isn't to say there would be no corruption only that the scale would be limited. There would only be some skimming off the top here and there. Reasonable sums of money would disappear and the development tenders would be handed off to very specific politician affiliated firms. This was to be expected in any event and all things considered this was actually on the better side. It was nothing to raise the alarms over.

The third question was the major one. This was where the inevitable catch lay. The politicians and the firms had made a silent agreement. Unspoken but it existed all the same. In this deal, the country's role was to look away. We did not have comprehensive laws to govern research centers and no capable bodies to inspect them even if we did. By taking their money, it was an open secret that things were supposed to remain that way. 

Once the research centers started to crop up, there was no explicit evidence that they did anything that would have been considered illegal or unscrupulous elsewhere. There were only rumours. Disturbing rumours.  Word of questionable experiments was whispered in many corners.  Many heard stories of slum dwellers being approached and offered money to work as lab rats only never to be seen again. Some spoke about the surprising lack of undocumented homeless people in many parts of the country after these stations set up shop. If you dug even deeper you would hear …but no. Like I said, strictly speaking, there was no evidence of such on goings. Then again, evidence can be difficult to find if you’re not really looking for it. 

But for the sake argument, let’s say we believe one of these rumours. The one that says one of the genetic research stations stumbled onto something new. No one knows what they were trying to do but what accounts seem to agree on is that what they got was something they were not expecting. Like many of these rumours begin, it starts with a group of tests subjects. Willing or unwilling, they're bundled into unknown locations with little to no knowledge on what will happen next. As it so happens, this entire group of subjects is all male. As the story goes, this is common. Men are easier to round up.  Drunks, beggars, thieves, absentee fathers and so on. Men disappear all the time for days on end before anyone thinks to start looking for them.
